Starting Up a Computer

When you tell your computer to turn on, with a button or with some other method, the power supply (or internal battery) sends a zing of electricity to the processor chip, which resets itself from whatever its previous state was and forces it to look for its boot-up firmware.
The system does a self-inventory and makes sure that everything is working correctly. If there's a problem, the system informs the user. 
If everything's good to go, the core of the operating system (the "kernel") loads onto the RAM, where it will remain the whole time the device is running.
The operating system starts running things and loading system configuration information, and finally loads the UI and any start-up applications. 

Shutting Down a Computer

The operating system controls what happens when the user tells a computer to "shut down", whether that means powering off completely, going to sleep, or going into "hibernation mode". 
When you power off your device, removes all power and wipes the contents of the RAM. 
Sleep saves open documents & running processes to the computer's RAM and shuts off anything not currently needed, like the display; if the computer loses power, changes will be lost.
Hibernation mode removes power to the computer, but first it saves open documents and running processes to the computer's internal hard drive, so that they can be recovered immediately when power is restored.

Managing Memory

Computers have a limited amount of RAM, so the operating system has to manage the things using memory to make sure there's enough to run everything. 
The OS pays attention to the processes that are running, and removes processes from being monitored in memory when they are no longer needed. 
If there's not enough RAM to go around, the OS might allocate a portion of the hard drive to be "virtual memory"; this creates more available memory for processes, but is slower, because accessing data from the hard drive isn't as fast as accessing data from RAM.
The part of the hard drive set aside as virtual memory is called a "swap file". 
